
   
   
      
         
             Dress To Thrill

            Coming to work on the bus the other day, I sat
across the aisle from a woman who was probably in her 50s. She was plain
looking and plainly dressed. I guessed her to be a household worker. Her slip
was showing. That is not unusual. What struck me was that the hem of her slip
was lace.

            I spontaneously said to myself, "What a pitiful
attempt at elegance!" But when I got off the bus and ruminated on it, I
realized that was a condescending and stupid reaction. She was saying
something. She was saying; "I'm not just a two-legged vacuum cleaner or
dishwasher. I'm a person who deserves to be respected and loved."

            That bit of lace made a big difference to her. It
was the difference between a work uniform and private, personal dress. Wearing
the lace was a decision she had made for herself, beyond the requirements of
her working life. She was expressing her membership in a class of people who
have a life beyond work and who have some bit of "fancy" in their dress to show
it.

            To whom was she making this statement? To herself,
of course. There may have been someone else--a husband or a boyfriend. But
first of all she was making it for herself, to make herself feel good.

            How do I know this,
Watson? I have not interviewed her nor spoken any word to her. But I imagine
that is the way people are. I imagine that people want to think of themselves
as belonging to a group that they admire or respect and dress as they think a
member of that group dresses. Their object is not to display their
individuality, except that they want to choose their group. I don't believe
that people in China were happy all wearing the same Mao jackets, because that
did not express membership in a group that they had chosen. I understand that
under those Mao jackets there were frequently bits of colorful clothing that
reflected more private choices.

            The message of the clothing is first of all to the wearer.
I think of those girls in West Side Story singing "I Feel Pretty!" They
didn't sing "I'm So Pretty." The important thing for them was to feel
pretty, and they associated the way they dressed with the feeling of being
pretty.

            We see all the young
women--and some not-so-young--walking around in the office district in short,
black dresses and shoes with built-up, chunky heels. For many of them, that is
not the most becoming outfit they could wear. That depends on how good their
legs are. And they are surely not expressing individuality. They are expressing
their membership in a class of women who are smart, professional, liberated,
and also feminine and sexy. They are expressing it to themselves and to
whomever may be looking.

            At the street corner there is a group of young men with
exceedingly droopy trousers and black, high shoes. The laces flopping loosely.
They are imitating prison dress. In their way--which may be entirely peaceful
and law-abiding--they are showing their solidarity with those who thumb their
noses at the mores of bourgeois society.

            What about all those men
you see in gray slacks and navy blue blazers with brass buttons? They are
ever-young alumni of Eastern colleges--or want to feel they are. They are proud
to be "Scarsdale Galahads," "Brooks Brothers types," despite the disdain with
which those words are used in Guys and Dolls .

            Of course, the extreme in men's dress is the dinner jacket.
All men--at least, the ones I know--say they hate to have to get into that
monkey suit. They curse as they struggle with the bow tie. But is there a man
with a soul so dead, or a waist so big, that he does not smile and say, "Bond,
James Bond," when he looks at himself in the mirror fully attired?

            When I was in the Nixon
administration, we were all very buttoned-down during the week. On Saturdays,
however, when only the "responsible" people, the presidential appointees, came
to work in the White House and the Executive Office Building, casual dress was
the uniform. That was our way of showing, to ourselves especially, that we were
intimates of those eminent locations.

            And what about me now? On the days I go to my office, I
wear a flannel shirt with no necktie if the weather is cool. In warm weather, I
wear an open-necked sport shirt with no jacket. Some people have said that I
dress "Israeli style," but that isn't really it. I am asserting my membership
in the club of "Old Geezers." We have paid our dues. We are free of
obligations, including the obligation to dress like everyone else. We know that
our dress is only a trivial sign of our liberation, but it is a sign we
enjoy.

            So, hail to you, my lace-bedecked bus mate! May you
always be elegant to yourself, as you will always be to me.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
             War by Numbers

            Do Americans grow faint at
the sight of their own blood? Certainly the poll-watching White House thinks
so. Congressional leaders from both parties are now urging the president not to
"rule out any option." Still, Clinton insists that "he has no intention" of
committing ground troops to the Kosovo war front and remains convinced that
airstrikes alone can persuade Serb forces to swear off their favorite pastime
of rape-and-pillage.

            Of course it is possible
that the parsable president sees political advantage in allowing Congress and
the public to push him into a ground conflict of uncertain cost and consequence
(Who knows the true meaning of "has no intention"?). But the White House may
also be misreading public attitudes. Polls taken during U.S. military
engagements from World War II through Bosnia suggest that the U.S. public is
pretty tough--tougher probably than our misty-eyed commander in chief.

            True, pundits such as Andy Kohut, director of the Pew
Research Center, have repeatedly warned that the public will cool once U.S.
casualties are incurred. During the first week of the NATO bombing of Serbia,
the White House got scant comfort from the public. Polls showed the expected
"patriotic bounce" when the action started but it was relatively small and
evanescent. In the last week of March, only slightly more than 50 percent of
Americans approved of the president's handling of the situation--a far cry from
the 80 percent plus who applauded President Bush's 1991 bombing of Iraq. This
despite the fact that the conflict had most of the hallmarks that,
historically, have made for American support for military interventions:
humanitarian purpose, concerted allied action (usually good in itself for a
10-point boost in the polls), and an identifiable villain.

            Still, that initial
lukewarm response didn't surprise polling experts. The American Enterprise
Institute's Karlyn Bowman, for example, pointed out that Americans are always
wary about putting troops in harm's way especially when U.S. interests aren't
well understood. And, despite his lingering credibility problems on foreign
policy, Clinton did manage to rally some 70 percent of the public behind his
February airstrikes on Iraq. "Perhaps that's because the public is more
familiar with the Saddam issue," Bowman noted, "Kosovo is less clear-cut."

            Since then, however, public opinion has gradually
toughened. And that doesn't surprise the experts either. Even at the start of
the bombing the public was remarkably realistic. In a March 25-26
Newsweek poll, while only
